AN ENDOCRINE SOCIETY PATIENT RESOURCE

POLYCYSTIC OVARY
SYNDROME

WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW

The endocrine system is a network of glands and organs that produce, store, and secrete
hormones. Normally, women make small amounts of “male” hormones (called androgens), but
women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) produce slightly higher amounts of androgens.
This hormone imbalance causes an assortment of health problems, many of which are related
to the reproductive system.

WHAT IS PCOS?

A hormonal disorder that may be characterized by a constellation of symptoms that may include:

e Irregular or absent menstrual periods Thinning scalp hair

Infertility Skin tags

Weight gain (especially at the waist)  Darkening skin

e Acne  Depression or anxiety
Excess hair on the face and body Poor sleep

When the body cannot use insulin properly, it secretes more insulin to make glucose available for
Cells. Often linked to obesity, many women with PCOS tend to make too much insulin. The resulting
excess in insulin is thought to also boost male hormone or androgen production by the ovaries.

POTENTIAL PCOS CAUSES

Although we don’t know for sure what causes PCOS and none of these is a direct cause,
each one is highly related to the condition.

So) —some women are less sensitive to insulin than normal, which
makes their ovaries produce too many male hormones.
—PCOS appears to run in families, so having a mother or sister with the
condition makes you more likely to have it.
Oo —because women and girls with PCOS are more likely to gain excess weight

and women and girls who are obese are more likely to have the condition, there is a tight,
but not absolute, link between the two.

Women with PCOS often have type 2 diabetes, low levels of good cholesterol
(HDL), and high levels of bad cholesterol (LDL) and other blood fats, including
triglycerides. These may increase the risk of heart attack or stroke.

Visit endocrine.org for more information.

Editor: Genevieve Neal-Perry, MD, PhD

ENDOCRINE &
SOCIETY maya





SS “(  )
On ultrasound, the ovaries ww

appear to have a multiple
number of small follicles

(also called cysts) that are

often arranged in a ring around
the ovary. Science indicates
these are related to arrested egg
development and failed ovulation.

DID YOU KNOW?

mien
n

PCOS CAN AFFECT
A WOMAN’S:

Menstrual cycle

e Ability to have children
Hormones

© Heart

e Blood vessels

e Appearance

Mental health

e Risk for cancer

Metabolic syndrome

TREATMENT

PCOS affects 7-10% of women of
childbearing age and is one of the
most common causes of infertility.

In addition to medications to help manage your
symptoms, a healthy diet and brisk physical
activity are nearly always part of a treatment plan
for PCOS. Attention to blood sugar levels is also
very important. Be sure to follow your treatment
plan exactly as your doctor prescribes so you can
control your PCOS symptoms and reduce risk
factors that can change the quality of your life.

e In the United States, an estimated 5-6
million women have PCOS.

Sleep apnea may occur in up to 50%
of women with PCOS.

Pregnant women with PCOS appear
to have higher rates of:

Miscarriage LIFESTYLE CHANGES

e Limit processed foods

Diabetes during pregnancy

Pregnancy-induced high blood © Add more whole grains

pressure (preeclampsia) e Eat more fruits, vegetables,

Premature delivery and lean meats

e Endometrial cancer e Maintain a healthy weight

Source: U.S. Department of Health and * Get moving

Human Services and National Institutes
of Health

Patients have questions. We have answers.
Endocrine Society is your trusted source for endocrine patient education.
Our free, online resources are available at endocrine.org/patient-engagement

ENDOCRINE &
SOCIETY maya




